	There is increasing evidence that the impacts of meteorites have had important effects 
on Earth, particularly in the field of biological evolution. Such impacts continue to 
pose a natural hazard to life on Earth. Twice in the twentieth century, large meteorite 
objects are known to have collided with Earth.
	If an impact is large enough, it can disturb the environment of the entire Earth and 
cause an ecological catastrophe. The best-documented such impact took place 65 
million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous period of geological history. This break 
in Earth’s history is marked by a mass extinction, when as many as half the species on 
the planet 10 became extinct. While there are a dozen or more mass extinctions in the 
geological record, the Cretaceous mass extinction has always intrigued 
paleontologists because it marks the end of the age of the dinosaurs. For tens of 
millions of years, those great creatures had flourished. Then, suddenly, they 
disappeared.
	The body that impacted Earth at the end of the Cretaceous period was a meteorite 
with a mass of more than a trillion tons and a diameter of at least 10 kilometers. 
Scientists first identified this impact in 1980 from the worldwide layer of sediment 
deposited from the dust cloud that enveloped the planet after the impact. This 
sediment layer is enriched in the rare metal iridium and other elements that are 
relatively abundant in a meteorite but 20 very rare in the crust of Earth. Even diluted 
by the terrestrial material excavated from the crater, this component of meteorites is 
easily identified. By 1990 geologists had located the impact site itself in the Yucatán 
region of Mexico. The crater, now deeply buried in sediment, was originally about 
200 kilometers in diameter. 
	This impact released an enormous amount of energy, excavating a crater about twice 
as large as the lunar crater Tycho. The explosion lifted about 100 trillion tons of dust 
into the atmosphere, as can be determined by measuring the thickness of the sediment 
layer formed when this dust settled to the surface. Such a quantity of material would 
have blocked the sunlight completely from reaching the surface, plunging Earth into a 
period of cold and darkness that lasted at least several months. The explosion is also 
calculated to have produced vast quantities of nitric acid and melted rock that sprayed 
out over much of Earth, starting widespread fires that must have consumed most 
terrestrial forests and grassland. Presumably, those environmental disasters could have 
been responsible for the mass extinction, including the death of the dinosaurs. 
Several other mass extinctions in the geological record have been tentatively 
identified with large impacts, but none is so dramatic as the Cretaceous event. But 
even without such specific documentation, it is clear that impacts of this size do occur 
and that their results can be catastrophic. What is a catastrophe for one group of living 
things, however, may create opportunities for another group. Following each mass 
extinction, there is a sudden evolutionary burst as new species develop to fill the 
ecological niches opened by the event. 
	Impacts by meteorites represent one mechanism that could cause global catastrophes 
and seriously influence the evolution of life all over the planet. According to some 
estimates, the majority of all extinctions of species may be due to such impacts. Such 
a perspective fundamentally changes our view of biological evolution. The standard 
criterion for the survival of a species is its success in competing with other species 
and adapting to slowly changing environments. Yet an equally important criterion is 
the ability of a species to survive random global ecological catastrophes due to 
impacts. 
	Earth is a target in a cosmic shooting gallery, subject to random violent events that 
were unsuspected a few decades ago. In 1991 the United States Congress asked 
NASA to investigate the hazard posed today by large impacts on Earth. The group 
conducting the study concluded from a detailed analysis that impacts from meteorites 
can indeed be hazardous. Although there is always some risk that a large impact could 
occur, careful study shows that this risk is quite small. 